Omelas’s Cultural Rights Report

	Discrimination is a cruel issue working its way around the globe. However, despite many ideas of how to combat it, no country or society has enforced these words into actions. World leaders like Donald Trump and Adolf Hitler have influenced the way we think about certain people, religions, and cultures. Omelas has proudly enforced laws through different methods, indeed helping it earn its name as a cultural rights leader and the title of Utopian.
Peacekeepers, the acting law-enforcers in the society, send out daily envoys to countries around the world in order to enforce people’s cultural rights and help them advocate for them. These Peacekeepers work on the foundation that Omelas does which is found in the Catholic religion, in the Bible, “Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.” (Matthew 5:9) Every person has the right to culture regardless of whether they are in Omelas or not, and the Peacekeepers, made up of people going into social work and high school students in the Succession credit course, work together with grassroots organizations and movements across the globe to reach their and help advocate for rights of language, race, gender, religion, and other important issues.
	Cultural rights have been enforced since children turn daycare age. As they begin schooling, they’re exposed to different cultures, ideas, and can see human similarities between each other through playmates.  Students get the option to work more in humanitarian efforts in order to get a Succession credit on their work skills portfolio in high school. This will give them an opportunity to work in areas such as doctors, cashiers, or any other job that involves dealing directly with people in the tertiary industry. Without this credit, students will have to either go back into an academy to earn it or work in the primary or secondary industries.
	Citizens have the right to freedom of following and/or practicing religion, to participate in any community activity regardless of background, culture, or any other criteria other than age, which may affect participation values. This is enforced through the peace-keeping organization, who observe every event in the community and respond to any complaint, despite there not being one since 1942. Citizens have the right to basic, economic, civil, and social rights regardless of any factor that may be discriminatory, unless it prevents the law from enforcing safety (example: voting age is 18+ for non-youth related issues). All languages that are listed as global-wide spoken are accepted in facilities as peacekeepers are accepted to have at least one spokesperson speaking that language. Citizens have the right to deny something if it goes against their religious or cultural values unless it threatens the safety of the society or may bring harm to the structure of the society. Religious holidays must be given as a paid-holiday and cultural traditions must be protected. Places of worship may be accessed at any time of the day, and workplaces must have a place for daily prayers or other traditions. Every culture and religion may follow their practices, so long as they do not harm or threaten other people’s rights. One race’s rights are equal to another, just as one female is equal to a man in Omelas.
Minorities are not addressed as minorities. Instead, their daily contributions to society and the economy make them equal, as they should be seen. No colour or belief makes one-person superior than another. Omelas is the first society to cleanly enforce cultural laws that haven’t been torn apart, and will continue to support efforts in making other countries like it.
